# useLayoutEffect: auto-scrolling textarea

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

**useEffect:** runs _after_ React renders the component and ensures that the
effect callback does not block browser painting.

> ðŸ’¡ If you don't need to interact with the DOM at all or your DOM changes are
> unobservable, use `useEffect`. (= 99% of the time)

**useLayoutEffect:** runs immediately after the DOM has been updated, but
_before_ the browser paints the changes.

> ðŸ’¡ If your effect is mutating the DOM (via a DOM node ref) and the DOM
> mutation will change the appearance of the DOM node between the time that it
> is rendered and your effect mutates it, use `useLayoutEffect`. (= 1% of the
> time)

## Background

There are two ways to tell React to run side-effects after it renders:

1. `useEffect`
2. `useLayoutEffect`

The difference about these is subtle (they have the exact same API), but
significant. 99% of the time `useEffect` is what you want, but sometimes
`useLayoutEffect` can improve your user experience.

To learn about the difference, read
[useEffect vs useLayoutEffect](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/useeffect-vs-uselayouteffect)

And check out the [hook flow diagram](https://github.com/donavon/hook-flow) as
well.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/04.js)

NOTE: React 18 has smoothed out the differences in the UX between `useEffect`
and `useLayoutEffect`. That said, the simple "rule" described still applies!

There's no exercise for this one because basically you just need to replace
`useEffect` with `useLayoutEffect` and you're good. So you pretty much just need
to experiment with things a bit.

Before you do that though, compare the finished example with the exercise.
Add/remove messages and you'll find that there's a janky experience with the
exercise version because we're using `useEffect` and there's a gap between the
time that the DOM is visually updated and our code runs.

Here's the simple rule for when you should use `useLayoutEffect`: If you are
making observable changes to the DOM, then it should happen in
`useLayoutEffect`, otherwise `useEffect`.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=04%3A%20useLayoutEffect%3A%20auto-scrolling%20textarea&em=).
